boom and we're live how are you sir oh
brother I'm so blessed to be here man I
want to salute you to work that you do
and the fact that you were one hell of
an artist man I'm telling you thank you
very much I'm gonna stand up comedy hey
look that's changed times
oh we the swing from the political to
personal from the animals on do the
divisionary it's just a beautiful thing
to behold my brother thank you from you
that is an honor I've been a huge fan of
you for a long time so for you to say
that to me means means the world oh it's
deep thing I can see your love for
Richard Pryor man I walk in your space
and I'm just transformed by the guys the
spirit there's Bri this place man yeah
it's here Pryor here then when you tell
me you work with the great Richard Pryor
oh my for five weeks I followed him I
was a young comedian at the Comedy Store
I went on right after him every night he
performed it was strange to be in the
room with him because when I was a 14
year old boy my parents took me see live
at the Sunset Strip and I could not
believe that anybody could be so funny
just talking that was my first
experience with stand-up comedy other
than that I had seen like I'd seen
people perform on The Tonight Show and
things along those lines I opened it was
like ha ha ha it was okay you know yeah
but when you see Richard in concert in a
movie theater I couldn't believe how
funny it was it didn't make sense I had
seen funny movies before like you know
comedy movies that were made you laugh
but nothing nothing like that I'm like
this guy's just talking it changed my
life that's that's up but you can see
the power of art yeah and it's connected
to freedom because I've always viewed
Richard Pryor as the freest men 20th
century certain to free as black man
along with Muhammad Ali he's the freest
black man in the 20th century he is so
self determining yeah the choices that
he makes has to do with his own sense of
self he doesn't care to other people
think he done another King looking for
other people's approval recognition he's
gonna be who he is any pays a major cost
for that he asked me
anytime you that free in a world of such
such on freedom you're gonna pay a major
major cost well he had spectacular
honesty in he - I feel like what
happened was Lenny Bruce open the
artform up and then Richard Pryor took
it to a new place that's in terms of the
the origins the real greats that's exact
but then George
oh yeah George Carlin Lee he was the
most prolific an hour special every year
until he died every year you different
each one different and mmm but all three
but at the but you are in that tradition
I was a member when I saw you doing the
the dogs and the cats getting inside of
their souls
you know I found that is don't man as an
artist and as a human being that do that
I said and it reminded me of prior it so
when I walk in and I see your connection
I said I'll be mmm I'll be I shouldn't
be surprised
well it was just being in the room with
him was strange I just couldn't believe
it was real you know I was in my 20s the
you in the 20s he was in his he was at
the end and like I said he couldn't walk
anymore they used to have to carry him
to the stage and but he performed sold
out every night sitting in the chair
yeah sat in the chair yeah yeah yeah but
it was sold out every night because I've
never seen I don't believe there's tapes
of it I don't believe anybody recorded
it if they did record it nobody released
it it was just this was in the 90s and
this was again this was the end of his
life he just decided you know he was
dying and he's decided to go back to his
love to go out he wanted to go back
doing stand-up cuz you got you look at
that picture January 1st 1963 brother
Pryor my brother just broke down on I
didn't even know what he got a road in
five days and he had a woman that he
knew he moved to Pittsburgh apparently
with so names about 22 years old
that their prior conviction there it is
there's the mugshot Wow what he got a
beginning so he had a friend of his
which is a woman that was singing in
clubs her father was a cop and in his
autobiography he wrote that among other
things that he or she paid him or she
gave him money he admitted to beating
her ass so I beat her ass first didn't
think about hitting a woman as much as I
thought about my own survival that led
him to being arrested sentenced to 90
days he served 35 of them and I had a
seven dollar fine he had a crazy life
man he grew up in a brothel yeah right -
in Peoria yeah your you know yeah now
what the violence against any sisters
wrong but prior definitely man he yeah
he was wild free cruel tinder genius
crazy wrong as he could be right as he
can he's a human being he's a
complicated human being no yeah I never
met him before but his spirit means the
world to me
me as well well I think every comic I've
never met a single comic that doesn't
think he's one of the most important
figures in the history of the art
probably the most important it's like
him and Lenny Bruce in my opinion and
then Kinnison later but Kinnison for a
much much shorter time who would be the
greatest female comic artist
I think Roseanne Barr Roseanne yeah
Roseanne is profoundly Talent yeah no
doubt about she she doesn't get the
credit she deserves because she's
legitimately mentally ill and that's one
of the things I had on the podcast to
highlight literally mentally she was hit
by a car when she was 15 she knows she
spent nine months in a mental hospital
yeah she lost her ability to count she
was very good at mathematics before that
and then after the car accident
the severe head injury changed her
personality yeah same with Kinison
Kennison is hit by a car when he was
young as well and changed his
personality radically to head injuries
make people very impulsive very wild and
impulsive and often times a slave to
their own impulses and I think Kennison
was a big example that as was Roseanne
but at Roseanne was the first really
loud
brash almost male female comedian who
could kill like a man you know she was
what about the young drivers and so I
love great monique gets to me she she
touches my soul every time she's on the
stage have you ever seen Miss Pat no
miss Pat's a monster really she's a
monster and she's had a crazy life she's
been on this podcast a couple times
her life was insane I mean she was
selling crack when she was 14 she had a
baby when she was 14 it was a 13 she
wasn't pregnant at 13 with a married man
had a couple kids with him yeah she's
she and she is so funny she's so wild
and funny
yeah there's something about the it goes
back to Aristophanes you know it goes
back to those early comics in the
history of the West who were willing to
tell the truth especially as it related
to the everyday experiences of ordinary
people you know the first plato's text
itself you know the Republic was
grounded in an imitation of the comic
writers who were the first to really
delve into everyday people's experiences
not the well-to-do that's tragedy
tragedy I only had to do it with the
nobility and aristocracy but it was
comedy that dwelled into the lives of
everyday people then Plato takes the
whole form and shifts it into the
dialogue and makes Socrates of course to
grant the grand hero but it was
Aristophanes at least in the West who
initiated this with the clouds and and
frogs and so on and it goes all the way
through from Jonathan Swift to Mark
Twain's and Nathanael West to the
brother-ish from Al Reid I mean these
are the great American comic writers
Twain Wes read and see comic writers are
different in the tragic ones hmm
Dostoevsky another couple Kafka's comic
in his own deep way to the greatest of
course a check off though Anton Chekhov
I know you check out check off right no
oh brother you haven't for
they lived Rasim anton chekhov yeah oh
you read three sisters I found you you
read the Cherry Orchard any of the short
stories he said over six thousand
characters in his short stories man whoa
- beats Rostand
and into the in the ravine or even
misery man the greatest one it's called
a student it's only two and a half pages
it's really a short story oh you read
that tonight it blow you're not mine you
listen you read that tonight listen -
look Curtis may feel okay listen - low
Stephen Sondheim okay
Stephen out Sondheim no more into the
woods
Curtis may feel I loved and I lost and
then the student check off
oh man you'll be ready for some serious
serious cardiac on your recommendation
oh no no because I know you use serious
intellectual to you you do your homework
but I'm just saying this in terms of
just enhancing you know all of our lives
I mean the comic writers the comedian's
various sorts be they on the stage a
being on the page or I think the
Vanguard some of the species in a very
deep way you know because we as a
species have to objectify our grief and
our pain and our sadness and our sorrow
and it begins with moans and groans and
you transfigure those moans and groans
first into song but song then moves into
language and the language is not
rational language of philosophy and
dialectic but it's a language of stories
especially the stories that are
self-critical we laugh at ourselves and
I'd add others we left with others
rather than just at others so it's not
that sudden glory that Hobbes talks
about in regard to the comic when you're
looking down and condescending you see
that's an aristocratic conception of the
comic you laugh and actor ordinary
people who are so dirty and filthy it's
profoundly anti-democratic right as if
you know well-to-do folk don't fart
right don't don't don't do number one
and number two and falling and I love
and act a fool and live lives of consent
consistency right but act when you get
these democratic forms of the comic see
that's you and Pryor and Roseanne and
Monique and George Carlin and all that
that's free-spirit dope brother and most
of our lives you see we're dealing with
the whole history of a species of
structures of domination oppression
that's the history of the species for
the most part and there's moments in
which there's breakthroughs in which
there's a freedom of spirits and then
you have some institutionalization of
that which is democracy that's why
democracies are so fragile and usually
don't last that long because it cuts so
wrapt could radically against the sense
of really wanting to be free I mean
those jet skis right most people really
are afraid of freedom they want to defer
to Authority they want to conform and
when they're introduced to freedom and
they really caches whole they say oh my
god it's tremendous cost to be paid but
I like that there's something about that
and they can hear it in the music they
can see it in your comic art the priors
and others and it allows these effects
and consequences of people's lives to
really enrich their lives before they
die why do you think people are afraid
of freedom
well it's courage I mean there is no
freedom without unbelievable
unprecedented unstoppable courage and
courage it's not widely distributed in
the species make informed and complacent
they're complicit in their cowardly
they well-adjusted injustice and want to
smile and walk around as peacocks rather
than cut against the grain and have to
bear witness and therefore end up on a
cross or like Socrates condemned
most of the great figures that we know
yeah and there's more consequences for
that now than ever
oh yeah cancel culture that's exactly
right yeah oh it's true it's very very
true
but I mean we live in a culture that's
so corporatized commercialized
marketized it's all about money money
money status that
status and you lose any deep sense of
honor of character it's all about what
appears to be the case it's the culture
of superficial spectacle so it's all
about image yeah you see yeah and image
is just some surface phenomena well I
can't recommend your bleep race matters
enough and one of the reasons is because
of your analysis of that your your
understanding of this the superficial
aspect of the pursuit that so many
people are locked into from cradle to
the grave and you just you encapsulated
that so well and and the way you worded
it and the way you phrased it it's it's
so it resonates so well and I I really
admire this lifelong pursuit that you
have for not just understanding these
things but explaining them in such a
succinct way where it's absorbable like
that book it's in the 25th anniversary I
wanted to talk to you about it because
that's the one I read and it's so
strange when you read something that's
so it's so current even though it's 25
years old it rings true and does that
sometimes does that feel futile where
you you you have the same issues for
that you spoke on 25 years ago and it's
very little change in those 25 years no
wonderful deep question though man I
appreciate you times that you spent
reading our race matters but no it's
never a futile don't man
I've never futile because you have a
conception of victory that is not
messianic or salvific you're not trying
to save people you're not trying to be a
messiah to bring some kind of grand
gospel to people you're simply trying to
touch people's lives so when you enrich
and enable person's life to win which
you've talked about that right there you
already talk about the ways in which you
were touched mm-hmm that means there's
no futility at all yeah no certainly not
if you took those via the fecundity of
it it's all all we can do
you know as human beings is to try to
inspire one another and encourage one
another and enable one another and Noble
one another
in that in and of itself was what the
great John Coltrane called
a force for good how do I become based
on a Love Supreme
a force for good in a cold and cruel
world hey star love supreme absolutely
absolutely and love supreme is not
loving the abstract right it's a love of
beauty in its concrete forms it's the
love of goodness in his concrete forms
it's the love of truth in its concrete
forms now I'm a Christian revolution at
Christian so I got a love of God
mediated through a Palestinian Jew named
Jesus but that's tied to a justice that
comes out of prophetic Judaism right and
we know Judaism Christianity Islam all
of these religions for me I have no
wholesale monopoly on how we understand
the world because he all emerged various
historical moments but when it comes to
this love that allows us to persist in a
world in which cruelty and Envy contempt
manipulation dishonesty and this shot
through all of us no we're not
finger-point in the name oh no you know
I've called up brother Donald Trump a
gangster over and over again and I and I
say that because there's a gangster
inside of me I got to reconquer it every
day
so I don't know gangsters when I see and
gangsters not a subjective expression
it's an objective condition mmm if you
grab on a woman's parts that's gangster
you Steagall somebody's oil in other
country that's gangster you lions and
these people have said that America's
garbage quit lying that's gangster they
got a critique of America you did to an
American carnage in your inauguration
you said or you're talking about the
full sisters in Congress saying well
evil Jews no Diana said evil Jews they
said evil doings of Israel every nation
state has done some evil things
right if there's a Palestinian state
which I hope there is they're gonna do
some evil things every nation state has
to be accountable us Ethiopia Guatemala
Israel China and so forth and so on and
every nation state has been associated
with certain forms of barbarism we know
that but there's some good things some
wonderful things about Israel some
wonderful things about Palestinians and
formations of creating a state that's
wonderful things about America I mean a
lot of people say even brother Trump's
wall they hate America no they love
American comics they love American music
you ask sister Talia beYOU asks us to
Priestly y'all love Aretha I've read the
Franklin means the world to me what
about marriage a marriage a means the
world marriage a and Aretha are as
American as Donald Trump even more in
some ways they many along their people
been that 10 generation yeah Donald
Trump's grandfather just arrived his
mother straight from Scotland precious
Marianne 1930 she arrives right and so
in that sense you say wait wait oh well
quit lie and let's just be honest and
candid just like the comics let's just
be honest and candid and recognize coz
what is the definition of comedy it is
first drama which is conflict
emotionally felt and critically
reflected upon but it's that conflict
that's rooted in incongruity things
don't fit so that's the possibility of
hypocrisy right and we know Apocrypha is
the tribute of Vice to virtue
so that just standards and you fall
short so you can laugh at it now when
it's really deep comedy is talking about
the human condition see that's a deeper
thing now see that's when you get
checked off and Shakespeare and Joyce
and the Blues because deep comedy is the
recognition of limits and incongruity at
the highest levels of the mind heart and
soul that's the different thing so I
mean you can start with comedy with you
know the clown rulers who walk around
slipping on bananas
or the sophisticated professor who
doesn't realize that he got a banana
hanging out the back of his pocket when
he's lecturing with the students they
buddy laughs and he don't know what's
going on well that's bodily based comedy
you know farts and bananas and so forth
and it's important yes but high comedy
is the highest levels of human dignity
love thought music mathematics
metaphysics and then recognize all of
those are in congruous they're broken
they're fractured there's dramatic
conflict of incongruity at the highest
levels of who we are as a species
now that's deep stuff there's deep Oh Oh
Lord Lord and one of the most
fundamental questions of Western
civilization is how come Socrates never
cries and Jesus never laughs ooh that's
the question Thomas Moore was wrestling
with in the Tower of London before he
was executed in his dialogues or
tribulation Socrates never shared the
tear what does that mean the founder of
philosophy in the modern West has a love
of wisdom but he never loves people
because it's impossible to love human
beings and not shed tears you go to your
mama's funeral and you're not shedding
tears and you're committed to the
socratic ideal of self mastery and self
control you need to get off the crack
pipe get off
show her the depths of your love for her
through being outside of your self
mastery the tears will flow you said and
it's the other way it's like your
daughter this precious thing that you
got when we walk in for your daughter
when she graduates
you and your wife gonna have tears of
joy that ain't the moment for self
mastery that's not the moment to be
Socratic and so when Socrates is dying
his wife walks in Zen tippy and she's
crying he's to get her get her away
again I can't stand to use that's a
problem yeah that's a problem you see I
come from Blackpool we start with tears
all the mess we had to come terms with
you know to me cries and so forth the
hebrew scripture begins with the cries
of oppressed people - right
but then Jesus never laughs wanna see
that's a deep one that is the one that's
GK Chesterton
Justin said Jesus turns over the tables
of the moneychangers he does not conceal
his rage crucial Jesus does weep that's
one of the most profound verses and in
the Christian Bible right
jesus wept you know unlike Socrates why
did Jesus weep he wept for Jerusalem he
wept for Lazarus he left
what for his friends but Jesus hides and
conceals his mirth
that's what justesen says is there any
laughter in the Bible well Isaac means
laughter when you think of the joke of
an older Sarah given birth to a young
person in a older age and so forth but
it's hard to catch Jesus laughing none
of the synoptic God the Gospels have
Jesus laughing some people thought they
discerned a grin somewhere because he
turned wine into water he probably had a
little little grin exact exactly but but
you can never get the full scale and
variety of the human condition in any
one tradition I think one of the
beauties of what you're saying here one
of the beautiful things about what
you're saying here is the complexity of
human beings and when you're dealing
with the situation between these girls
that called themselves a squad and
Donald Trump and you deal with these
very simplistic things like these chants
of send her back or lock her up or they
hate America or you know this this is
simplifying things is is so attractive
to some people and so attractive during
political discourse right dude during
these these times are you trying to
rally up a campaign and get get the
audience behind you this is one of these
simplistic things resonate but as a
human being we know that things like I
don't these I don't subscribe to this
idea that human beings are good or bad I
think there's other way yeah I'm sure
look the way Donald Trump loves his
family I'm sure there's love in that
kind
I'm sure there is on me he's had some
you know relations to his mother and his
brothers and sisters that were not ones
of sheer manipulation of domination
there's no doubt as a human being it's
important to keep track of his humanity
but at the same time what happens is the
dominant patterns of behavior
this is rise me about brother Trump
specially the fact that he's head of the
American Empire and and head of the
government you see them when you have
dominant patterns of behavior that are
completely unaccountable see for so long
he's been able to get away with things
with no accountability at all
yes that's what makes him a kind of
Peter Pan like figure up buddy till he
became president she grew powerful yeah
but he hadn't grown up but even as
president he hasn't grown up people
would had thought that he would grow
into the office no he just hasn't grown
up he tried to manipulate the office
position to change to be what he is
that's right and I think people love
that there's certain people that
resonates with them they think that's so
attractive they love it well they I
think they love it because it's
experience that I mean the first thing
that you know Trump was able to do was
to expose the prepackaged commodities
that we call politicians yes that he
came across as somebody who was just
himself yes you see just gangster that
he is yeah and he just tell the truth
oh I was a close friend of Hillary's I
was been at the same weddings and so
forth cuz that's how the elite circulate
yes and in an American Empire but then
when they discovered long the whole he's
now he's posing himself as some kind of
oppositional figure and yet he's tied to
big money tied to big military when he
gets in he brings in the old-school
militarist people he still dropping
bombs on the nine countries had been
dropping bombs for the last number of
years tax cuts sound exactly the same
and Mitch McConnell and others warned it
we thought we had something different
here
you see and it has to do with the what
woman is the largest origin we have to
be honest about this that see we live in
both a very fragile and precious
experiment in democracy and we live in
an empire that is experiencing profound
decline decay and deterioration
simultaneous so you can from the very
beginning United States was really in
some ways much more tied to gold and
resources and land and so this crucial
Democratic experiment is predicated on
the monstrous crime against indigenous
peoples that we've never come to terms
with so you get a lot of neoliberal
chatter about America's original swing
of slavery that's a lie the original sin
was we had to decide whether we were
going to coexist with indigenous peoples
or dominate them and the decision was
for the most part genocidal effect in
terms of domination so it's a settler
colonial society a colony of Britain you
see
then we enslaved the Africans who become
the basis of our economy and the vast
majority of profits made were actually
tied to slavery that's why so many of
the president's first presidents in
American slaveholders and the Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court
slaveholders and so forth that that
doesn't mean that certain democratic
practices were not being enacted but it
was enacted for white brothers with
property the white brothers who had no
property they couldn't vote at all the
women of course couldn't vote until 1920
so he had domestic households in which
they had to find some sense of
fulfillment that's what history of
patriarchy and misogyny in part are
connected and then tremendous efforts
come to expanding it expanding it and
this is why even when brother Trump
talks about socialism he doesn't realize
the pledge of allegiance was written by
Francis Bellamy who was a socialist the
song American the Beautiful which is one
of the most beautiful sultry child sing
that song it take you to a differently I
mean he's seeing things that we can't
see and you know he's blind you know
what I mean America the Beautiful
Elizabeth Lee Bates socialist professor
Wellesley who was our greatest poet Walt
Whitman deep ties to socialism who was
our greatest philosopher John Dewey
Democratic Socialist his whole life
Helen Keller deaf mute blind graduated
Radcliffe socialists Reinhold Niebuhr
the greatest Christian thinker to
twentieth-century democratic socialist
moral man and immoral Society Martin
Luther King jr. democratic so the Ella
Baker Democrat democratic socialism is
as American as apple pie but with the
Communists and the Communists threat and
the Soviet Union and all of his
repression and regimentation and
violation of liberties and killing of
the culottes and so forth in the
American mind socialism becomes
associated with communism and so you saw
brother Lindsey the other day right yes
he looked like a cartoonist version of
Joseph McCarthy there are all communists
they're all communists and you see what
happens is in the mail fascist discourse
is treating where around the world if
you couldn't define a community is pure
and then characterize those on the
outside who are threatening as impure
and didn't view yourself as those coming
to the rescue to preserve the purity it
can be based on race you can be based on
religion you can be based on politics
preserve that purity we saw it in the
50s with the hysteria the comments for
what Smith Act they're deported or they
taken to jail
I mean the first the first city
councilman from Harlem Benjamin Davis
went to jail because he was a communist
you see because they were the impure mmm
now communism needs to be radically
called into question in terms of it
nominating forms like the Soviet Union
China on the mile and so forth and so on
but at the same time when you look at
Karl Marx and his critique of capitalism
he this is prior to let it prior to
Stalin prior
he says capitalism is tied to this
obsession with profit that puts profit
before people and it will generate all
Nagappa leads in which there will be
grotesque levels of wealth inequality
and the only way that poorn working
people will be able to gain access to
any resources to do organizing and
mobilizing now you can accept that
Marxist insight without being a Marxist
just telling the truth do you think that
socialism just hasn't been implemented
correctly is that what you think because
like the the argument has always been
show me a socialist economy or socialist
government that ever worked right right
but right there's so many people that
find the idea of socialism attractive
because it it combines this idea of a
community with a nation and that we're
all tied together and we we obviously
have some socialist aspects to our
civilization in terms of like utilities
and we outsource the military
firefighters outside as police there has
to be some kind of ER mental control but
the the problem is this that if we have
to view democratic socialism as a moment
in the larger movement of democracy my
dear brother Jeff stout is one of the
great philosophers and thinkers of
democracy calls them egalitarian freedom
traditions and that's simply a way of
saying that if you look at the world
through the lens of the masses of people
who are poor and working people what are
the conditions under which they can have
security from domination what are the
conditions under which they can have
dignity by holding forms of oppression
at arm's length and for me it's not an
ism you see in capitalism visa vie
feudalism can generate liberal
he's in freedoms I'm forward hmm and
that's precisely what the middle classes
did when they broke from feudalism in
Europe or broke from feudalism in other
parts of the world right you had to
overthrow kings and queens in the name
of personal liberties but those personal
liberties were confined to often to
white brothers with property hmm and the
white brothers with no property they
either trying to hold on to the white
and so they become like the white
brothers with property or they make
moral choices and said I want to be a
person of integrity I want to fight with
the folk who are being excluded and this
is one of the problems in talking about
race and white supremacy in America
because you see we think too often in
monolithic categories there's never been
of white supremacy without fighting
against white supremacy and that
includes white brothers and sisters
there's a tradition from and Breeden
from Myles Horton you know of Highlander
Center you got that wonderful picture of
Rosa Parks she was at Highlander Center
four months before she was arrested
before she sat down on a bus and order
standing up for justice right there hi
listen on the mouse horn who was Myles
Horton a white brother who brought black
folk and white folk together went to
Union seminary trained on the Reinhold
Niebuhr he had cousins in the Ku Klux
Klan Wow so his Thanksgiving dinners
were very complicated but that's true
for a whole lot of white brothers who
fight against white supremacy and Braden
Rabbi Abraham Joshua Heschel me Atwoods
ie you have a whole tradition of white
brothers been fighting against white
supremacy you get it in the music Beks
Beiderbecke he's sitting at the feet of
Louis Armstrong and he's a great artist
Louis genius of geniuses right and that
middle class brother from Iowa you asked
him about white supremacy u.s. Brubeck
about white supremacy you asked any of
the Paul Desmond all of these folks who
are connected to traditions in which
black humanity brown humanity is seen
and affirmed
you had a point in the book race matters
that resonated with me that I never
really thought of before and what you
said was that because of the fact that
the United States has this deep history
of slavery and the slavery of African
Americans that white people became white
people instead of polish and German and
Italian instead of it being like most
other countries where they the Italians
think of themselves as Italians and the
Greeks or the Greeks those were white
people they're all coldly combined as
white people I never thought about that
before know what I mean you've got these
scholars of American Studies nail pain
was one of the towering ones but it goes
all the way back to brother Alexander
and and David David wrote anger and some
others who've been talking about the way
in which whiteness was created
take for example an Irish brother who
caused Ellis Island his people been
dealing with 800 years of vicious
British colonialism and imperialism
vicious attacks various famines that in
some ways created or at least enabled
and so on they get to New York and
they're told that they're white and they
say no no because we know the British
are white and we're not British right oh
oh but then they say yes you are look at
brother West look at your mom look at
Letitia where you gonna go on the Jim
Crow bus I can just get off the boat
from Ireland right you go to the front
you would vanilla folk you go to the
back you with the chocolate fuck what
you're gonna do and for our precious
Jewish brothers and sisters it was even
more complicated more complicated right
they get there no we're not with the goy
and we're not with the Gentiles y'all
been oppressing us for 2,000 years
pogroms ghettos holocaust vicious
attacks and so on but then they get then
say well are we gonna be in the back
with the black folk some of them did he
says because you got a rich tradition of
progressive Jews knowing Chomsky what he
got back there Stanley around wit what
it got back there with the black folk
you say that me but you got some other
Jewish folk like any other group
well we kind of lukewarm this is kind of
moved back and forth and then someone
want to simulate completely especially
the highbrow German Jews
we're actually white as well as the
Gentiles you're in America now get
beyond that old-world prejudice you say
well you better check yourself cuz every
Christian civilization we know it's not
through with Jewish hatred mmm
don't don't believe the hype soonerlater
is gonna be manifest you see what I mean
and so in that way you can see the
discourse of whiteness blackness Brown
this redness and so forth becomes so so
deeply rooted in American law American
structures American perceptions and this
is why the arts are so crucial because
it's primarily in the music and in the
arts where the breakdown of white
supremacy begins to take place in the
country it's not the politicians it
really isn't it really isn't there's no
accident that the first massive form of
entertainment in the United States is
what the minstrels in blackface and you
see what was going on with blackface
where a lot and others have talked about
the love and theft on the one hand
there's a fear of black freedom because
black freedom somehow means less freedom
for whites there is a fear of black
creativity because that means maybe
white supremacy is a lie maybe they're
human just like us maybe they just as
creative imaginative and telling it just
like us then they hear the music and
they say oh they got something going on
in the black side of town but we don't
know it's like you're going to see Pryor
right somebody who told you old brother
Joe white supremacy of America tells you
that black creativity black intelligence
black genius doesn't exist and you go
see Pryor with your parents and you go
away thinking dis Negros a genius
somebody lied to me I got to recognize
that and then you recognize those the
whole tradition of Prayer and we go on
and off from the Coltrane serovar and on
and on and on right and so people begin
to think especially white buzzin sisters
my parents have been lying
when it comes to black intelligence
imagination and genius and humanity and
yet the structures make it difficult for
us to come together we're talking about
up until 1960 that's a long time though
1776 the 1964 and 5 that's a long time
for both slavery and neo slavery to be
in place in here we are now fifty-four
years later trying to create a
multiracial democracy which is a
beautiful beautiful thing and it's
already been enacted in the in into jazz
groups slide stones bands multiracial
the combination did the studying of the
commies did you chew all have you sit
down with comics y'all talk about the
genius across race and Jim jr. gene and
gender as if it's a natural thing that
already shatters the white supremacist
internets and male supremacist
categories of lightness blackness all in
different silos but it's so hard to do
it on the ground see part of the problem
of talking about race in America so I've
been very critical of a number of
contemporary black intellectuals because
white supremacy cuts so deep in the
culture people begin to think it has
magical powers and somehow it it just
floats above American history as if it's
just part of our DNA in a biological way
but all conceptions of race in the
modern world are grounded in predatory
capitalism so that the talk about
whiteness and blackness becomes a way of
rationalizing social structures like
slavery and Jim Crow and it has to do
with trying to extract labor resources
it's an attack on their humanity and
identity but it's tied to economic
structure so to talk only about race
means we hide and conceal the social
structures that are generating
unbelievable suffering for everybody
mmm everybody you see and so the last
thing you want is talk about race I'd
say the same thing about gender in the
way ginger is much more complex
because genders been around for so so
long every culture that we know almost
but in modern conceptions of race are
tied to modern conceptions of predatory
capitalism here and abroad which
includes imperialism which includes
empires such as the United States comes
out of the British Empire we engage in a
heroic courageous revolt against the
British Empire it was a magnificent
struggle that's what I like about George
Washington and Thomas Jefferson I'm an
anti imperialist they were anti
imperialist
now they're urban guerrillas they
picking up guns they fight I don't go
that far but they're also white
supremacist you see so as soon as they
overthrow or push back the British
Empire what do you get in the
declaration of independence beautiful
words about equality but you also get
savages we got to take their land and
you get an empire of Liberty this is
where the comics come in what does an
empire of Liberty look like who's not in
on the Liberty it's a whole lot of
people not in on it
no that was Karlin right Karlin had this
bit about this country was founded by
slave owners who wanted to be free
that's right and talk about the American
dream you got to be do you think much
like this country is an experiment in
self democracy a very recent experiment
when you look at human history hundreds
of thousands of years that we've been
human there's really only been a couple
of years hundred years of this do you
think that that's maybe the lens that we
should look at something like democratic
socialism through not that it can't work
but that it hasn't been implemented
correctly before that's exactly that's
why we got to get beyond the ISM you're
absolutely right see what makes not just
United States has been democratic
experiments all around the world in
various circumstances we become central
stage because we become a world power
that understands itself as a democracy
with all the contradictions that go
ahead and an amitab begin as a settler
colonial enterprise still got slavery
patriarchy workers don't have the right
to engage in collective bargaining in
the United States
in the nineteen thirties hmm Argentina
had in the eighteen thirties Argentina's
not known to being on the cutting edge
for social justice love you down there
in Argentina but they know that but they
had a collective bargaining why because
our robber barons and our power elites
was so powerful hmm you see rockefeller
and company had private militias that
were bigger than a lot of public armies
to make sure workers were not able to
engage in collective bargain I was in
San Francisco just yesterday at the
Commonwealth Club which is now lodged it
the Longshoremen's Association which is
fascinated Commonwealth well-to-do
ruling class
Harry bridges longshoremen strong unions
Jack London another great social is
there in Oakland right and what would he
trying to do they were just trying to
ensure that ordinary people gain access
to jobs with a living wage decent
education this is one reason why I've
spent so much time with my dear brother
Bernie Sanders right because it's a
democratic project that simply says how
come poor children can't have access to
some of the things that the children of
the well-to-do have they have the same
value and of course as a Christian for
me they have exactly the same value
right so how will they get it well here
comes socialist movements that say first
thing you want to do is we're gainst
child labor laws yes that's the jungle
that's Upton Sinclair he's a socialist
tried to be governor California right
and what were they doing what were these
these Capitol is doing they're hiding
these kids at six years old seven years
old they were dying at 30 there were no
laws against child labor end up working
seven days a week so the labor movement
has brought us to weaken and I'm not
talking about the singer from Canada god
bless him I'm talking about the two days
we have off because if we didn't have
that from the socialist moving in the
labor movement they'd have been working
young kids seven day they did that year
after year decade after decade
that's greed right and that's that's
read there's no accountability that's
where that whole idea of the let the
market decide falls apart thanks
because the market just wants profit
right absolutely and that doesn't mean
that markets cannot be used in
democratic ways but they need to be
ethical but they gotta be ethical you
got to have some accountability and
regulation and child labor laws were
very important at a breakthroughs at
that time but there are other you had
you need to have laws to make sure the
water was clean and the food was
regulated and clean and so there's a
narrative that you get from poor people
often or people that are lower middle
class that are against the concept of
socialism because they equate it with
people that want a free ride that's
really they equate it with people that
don't want to work hard that's right and
that that's it's a strange narrative
when you consider all the things we
talked about already like the what we
need with the fire department and the
police department and all the different
ways that socialism does form utilities
and all the different ways of socialism
does form a part of our culture and our
community why do you think that that is
this narrative and how does that
narrative get reshaped because that
narrative of that the only reason why
people want socialism is because they
want a free ride right right whoo that's
a wonderful question but the one is that
you had first we had to listen very
closely to our right-wing brothers and
sisters and conservatives and Midler's
because oftentimes I mean they're human
means like anybody else and they had
their own arguments I don't think they
have strong ones but they have their own
arguments so the first thing you say
about that is what makes you think that
the well-to-do don't have free rides
what is inheriting wealth all about
well inheriting wealth is free rap
salutes all it is what is freq the
connection so getting into the prep
schools and then Ivy League schools and
so forth even though they work is still
a kind of free ride so if they're
preoccupied with this issue of being
free ride we tell them let's make sure
that people do work hard yes and
sacrifice and therefore in some way
deserve what they have now if just based
on that Prince
the upper echelon of American society
would be indicted
yes deeply indicted and it's not a
matter of hating the rich because I
don't believe in hating anybody
individually
I hate greed yeah I hate injustice I
hate white supremacy I hate anti-jewish
prejudice I hate anti Palestinian
presence I hate patriarchy and so forth
but the human beings where these
ideologies filter through hmm are still
human beings yes you see what I mean so
that's the beginning of it now of course
part of the question here is has to do
with they'll say well we've wasted this
money on the poor you said we'll wait a
minute Donald Trump just passed the 750
billion dollar military budget Democrats
voted for it too how much waste is in
the military
why is 60 cent of every $1 coming out of
the federal budget tied to the military
why is it no close oversight and
accountability of it how come American
people don't know about the four
countries that we're bombing or
assisting other countries in bombing we
can go right down packets down
Afghanistan Yemen absolutely Mali Niger
Somalia Iraq and we can go on and on and
on right how come we don't know about
the 48 hundred military units 587 around
the world
we got US Special Operations in 128
countries only under 97 in the world
right what about the soldiers who died
hardly any talk about it what about the
innocent people we kill hardly and they
talk about it what about the drones and
we still drop it and not always on
military combatants but innocent people
almost primarily on innocent people
sometimes even disproportionately those
are precious people too you know it may
have the same value as anybody in
Ethiopia America Chicago you feel that
don't drones are particularly insidious
because it doesn't even seem like it's
really happening because it's over
about doing it absolutely it's done
lonely distance remotely no sensitivity
at all apparently the PTSD that suffered
by those remote drone operators is
pretty profound too you could understand
yes yeah II understand yet no serious
public conversation about an entire day
I was on the plane the other day and the
pilot says I hope you all are able to
take a few minutes of your time because
we got a family outside waiting for the
body if someone just killed in
Afghanistan's an Italian family in
Chicago one of the saddest things you
won't see in your life man as a family
lined up and they bring in the body out
and you say to yourself how come there's
no public spotlight on that and you see
what I was growing up in the 60s Walter
Cronkite Vietnam we saw the bodies well
during the Bush administration they made
it illegal to take photographs of
flag-draped coffins which is
unbelievably insane that's exactly right
and continued under Obama and company
you know you say well wait a minute they
they're paying this ultimate cost and
the they changed the narrative the tears
of the the families and the kidding put
a public spotlight on it my god and then
of course they lie to us as well well
our drones are not in any way killing
civilians and end up killing an American
and they have a press conference the
same day and economic compensation the
family the rest of their life I agree
with that
but what about the drones that are
killing folks in Yemen and Somalia in
Pakistan and Afghanistan
oh they denied her even killing them and
you say quit lying that's John Brennan
and company using both Bush and Obama
administration you see how do we keep
track of those in the name of what
democratic accountability that's not
socialism socialism is democratic
accountability but there's been
socialism without democratic
accountability and what do you get
tyranny that's Soviet Union and company
but when you get capital
with no democratic accountability what
do you get you get a predatory
capitalism with gross wealth inequality
and everyday people the masses are poor
and working people fighting for crumbs
and there's also this denial of it
amongst the most patriotic they don't
want to consider it they don't want to
factor it in to what we think of when we
think of America the great we don't you
want you don't want to factor in those
innocent people which I what was the
last time we checked it was in the 90%
right of people that are there killed by
drones are actually innocent it's it's
some insane numbers but we have to have
voices that's part of the problem though
you have to have voices that say I don't
give a damn for popularity I'm trying to
be wedded to integrity I want to put a
smile on my Grandmama's face in the
grave and she told me as a Christian
that if the kingdom of God is within you
then everywhere you go you ought to
leave a little heaven behind and heaven
takes the form of laying bare the
humanity of each and every one of us
especially the least of these that's a
25th chapter Matthew write what you do
to the least of these you do unto me who
are the least of these the orphan the
widow the poor the children the elderly
the workers the gays and lesbians the
trans especially the transduce day they
just trashed like I don't know what but
they're black folk they're brown folk
they're white poor they're indigenous
peoples not just here but around the
world and what does that mean that means
that you have a certain kind of calling
that will always pitch you over against
those who are well adjusted to injustice
hmm no matter what color they are well
adjusted to injustice it's very very
beautiful way of putting it no it's it
that's that's part of the suit part part
of the problem the American Dream didn't
go far enough the American American
Dream says I'm
gonna work hard sacrifice and get mine
and live large and some vanilla suburb
maybe with a trophy spouse I didn't feel
good about myself you say nothing wrong
would want in the gay ancestor resources
nothing wrong with working hard nothing
wrong with living where you want to live
but then the question becomes now you're
successful but you're not great
greatness has to do what he or she who
uses their success for something bigger
than them service to others service to
the least of these so that the great
ones like to Richard Pryor's you see not
a matter of how much money he made as a
matter of his soul in his comedy and the
love that he left in his legacy long as
the King jr. died basically a broke man
gave every penny that he won from the
Nobel Prize to the movement Malcolm X
only only had $150 in his pocket who
cares about the riches black person in
1968 in 1965
that's ephemera we're talking about deep
joe i deep love we will remember those
who raised their voices and said in the
name of something bigger than my ego
with my narcissism and my hedonism and
we all have it we all have it so you
know we have to always be self-critical
in there we go we all fall short you
know the great Samuel Beckett number
great now the great comic writer try
again fail again fail better mm-hmm
that's the story of our life yeah
try again fell again fail better but
even if failing better we can at least
raise our voices and try to connect it
to movements and organizations and
structures and thank God we still do
have a a significant number of decent
people in the American Empire they just
feel powerless well there's this
conversation that's happening now right
and there's a conversation that's based
on the information of recognizing the
fact that so many people have wasted
deep aspects of their lives long long
lives pursuing meaningless things and
and recognizing that there is a lot of
injustice in this world and that people
are afraid of admitting that injustice
because then they would somehow another
be complicit in the enactment
that injustice I think it's one of the
things that people are terrified of when
you talk about doing something to
reinvigorate poor and disenfranchised
communities that's right they start
talking about the welfare state or well
but it's this is not how things should
be done then people need to pull
themselves up by their bootstraps not
recognizing that everybody is in started
the same starting line absolutely
there's a concept that I've been talking
about that if you really cared about
America you would want less losers like
what it was the best way what's the best
way to love America what would you want
more winners you'd want everybody to be
a winner if we have these
disenfranchised parts of this country
that have been that way forever there's
a guy that's been on this podcast who
was a police officer in Baltimore
stammers Michael would and he talked
about how when he was a police officer
he recognized the systemic racism and
how crippling it was and one of the
things that he recognized was they found
a piece of paper that was a blotter
report of all the different various
crimes that were committed from the
1970s it was a some year in 1970 it was
the exact same crimes in the exact same
communities that he was dealing with
them and he was generation after
recognizing the redlining about the fact
that there was areas where black people
were not allowed to buy homes that they
kept them in these communities the same
crimes kept occurring in the same places
and all they were doing was going in
there and arresting people and nothing
changed and nothing was fixed and as a
police officer he was realizing and just
becoming aware of the fact that this is
he's a part of the system he didn't want
to be a part of the system anymore but
he was a part of this system that is
creating this problem when you address
that though the people that don't suffer
in those communities that aren't a part
of that community there's a natural
inclination to resist no that's true and
it's because they don't want to do
anything they don't they don't want to
think they're responsible they don't
want to think they're a part of it they
don't want to discuss it even discussing
it you feel resistance they will in the
state of denial
yes trying to avoid and trying to evade
no it's it's very it's very real that's
very real but you know it also works
with Ian
communities of people of color and this
is again why I think we have to resist
any monolithic care or homogenious
characterizations of people see so they
need time to talk about white supremacy
you've got the John Brown's and you know
Mary Ellen Pleasant who was the a black
woman who was worth 347 million dollars
in the 1840s whoa she's called the
mother of human rights in California
rich white brother and he died I wanna
look with millions of dollars first
thing she did she gave John Brown a
million dollars Wow John Brown hadn't
even notice from her in his pocket well
then he was at Harpers Ferry that's how
he survived see now John Brown was
killing some people I think that's wrong
I don't believe in innocent people no
matter who they are no matter what color
but at the same time John Brown had a
love of black people bunch of deeper too
many black people have of themselves as
he's willing to die for black people but
the same is true within let's say black
communities you've got okay one percent
of the population in America who owned
41% of the wealth you got three
individuals who have wealth equivalent
to 160 million fellow citizens but
within the black community the top 1% of
black folk at what was 70 percent of the
wealth so that means you got a lot of
precious Jamal's and the teachers out
there who don't who are told to live
vicariously through the lives of black
celebrities so it's all about
representation rather than substantive
transformation you get that in
politicians you know you got a black
president
all of y'all must be free isn't that a
beautiful thing live through him live
through the family beautiful achievement
magnificent achievement but it's not
about symbolic representation only this
is about fundamental transformation so
it's a challenge Mary Ellen Pleasant and
others in Martin King and others are
challenges for those of us who do have
some resources to still raise our voices
because you can be black highly well
adjusted to injustice economically terms
of race and so forth
and the same is true you can be brown
you can be red so it's not just a matter
of looking for that one individual who
represents it's a matter of connecting
that representation to fundamental
transformation if there's no fundamental
transformation you end up with a whole
generation of peacocks look at me look
at me look at me all about forage and
what does that do that falls directly
into the culture of superficial
spectacle yeah last thing we need is
just spectacle with no substance in that
way and this is the battle within within
the communities of peoples of color
because it's not it's not gonna be a
matter of just pointing out white
supremacy of course white supremacy is
fundamental foundation in part of the
country it's not the only foundation
because you got resistance to white
supremacy Lydia Maria child she wrote a
book in 1834 called an appeal but that
class of Americans called Africans it
was deeply influenced by one of the
greatest works ever written at that time
by David Walker appealed the colored
citizens of the world she's a wife
sister she is as vanilla as Doris Day in
the eighteen thirties fundamental part
of the black freedom movement right but
you see those folks need to be lifted up
because what does that do that exposes
our humanity in terms of the choices we
make not just the skin color we have and
I would say the same thing in terms of
gender the brothers who are
fundamentally concerned about breaking
the back of patriarchy when we know
patriarchy is shot to us because we grew
up in the 1950s and 60s no man escapes
it but you try to recon at all and the
same is true or our precious gays and
lesbians and trans folk you see to be
decent human beings who make moral
choices yeah I believe in the primacy of
the moral and the spiritual the
centrality of the artistic especially
the musical and especially the comics as
the vanguard who represent a freedom and
a courage and a vision to connect us as
you
and beings because you can't really be a
comic with a wholesale Nazi ideology now
you can be a Nazi genius like Martin
Heidegger who was a great philosopher
and a genius and a Doug when it comes to
pop when it comes to politics you see
but a comic has got to be able to be
open enough to deal with the incongruity
and inconsistency and the sheer
absurdity of it all you talked about
moments of freedom earlier and I
recognize that is like one of the
greatest things you ever see when
someone's on stage and they're killing
there's moments where everyone's
together they're all together locked up
in the laughter and they're all together
there's a sense of community that you
share with the people that are in the
room absolutely it does bring people
together even if it's for brief moments
for a few seconds or yeah the taste buds
are not to be trashed life consists of
moment yes you know what at me yes
definitely and it's in a democracy you
see it's those moments that constitute
the memory of what could be yeah as
opposed to what's in place you know the
great August Wilson the great playwright
of black playwright deeply influenced he
said by the Blues Baraka and beard and a
row man be written the great painter but
I marry Baraka of course from Newark
like yourself like Sarah Vaughan and
Philip Roth right different newer he
used to say that performance authorizes
alternative realities for the audience
that gets them to unsettle their
conventional perceptions of the world
whoa and that's what great artists and
great comics but that's what that's what
you yeah that's you doing strange times
oh brother that you bring in the fact
that we're living in such a grim moment
what I'd call you know an American
Empire in decline and we all need to
call for its regeneration its Democratic
revitalization and regeneration but how
do we do that only by example man
because there's a difference between
what the great Roberto Unger calls
biographical time and historical time
all of us are born in circumstance is
not of our own
choosing we're only here for so long we
all have insecurities anxieties and
fears knowing that our body's willing to
go extinction when they very soon and
therefore to deal with those
insecurities and fears and anxieties you
have to have certain structures of
feeling and valued it gives you some
sense of worth wildness as you move
through time from mother's womb to tomb
right and it's only in biographical time
because we only got one life decided
Jordan and there's no person who's a
messiah not days people will tell you
they are but you say okay just go at it
be self deceived and drink your coffee I
can keep moving because there's no
messiahs out there there's no saviors
out there there's no messiahs in groups
there's no messiahs in collectivities
there's only lives to be live we back to
check off again
lies to be lived acknowledging things
were in place before we arrives so
therefore we ought to have gratitude for
the love that we received that's how I
begin my my whole life I am Who I am
because somebody loved me it's mom it's
dad it's my brother's my sisters it's my
friends right and I don't deserve it and
I have to somehow following ashford wins
Astrid and Simpson they say send it like
a puff of smoke you got to let it go
spread whatever love justice by example
examples are the gold cart of justice
that's a wonderful line inconsequently
cook pure reason examples are the gold
cart of judgment the judgments we make
are predicated on the examples that we
have and we must have examples of
greatness if you're gonna be a classical
composer you better study some loot
later you're gonna be a serious artist
of the musical theater you better study
a genius who's still alive named Stephen
Sondheim from West Side Story the
company needs a Sunday in the park with
George - passion - Sweeney Todd across
the board not to imitate but just to
know what greatness is
genre few in hip-hop you better study
some Rakim mmm woohoo you better study
some follow-the-leader
laughs put Tupac that's right you best
study the folk look great it's the same
way you know you study Pryor and Bruce
Lenny Bruce and the others and Roseanne
Barr and the others but that's one of
the more important parts of being a
person right is to really your diet of
what you take in in terms of what
whatever whether it's your art or
whether it's your education try to take
in the best and most inspirational and
the most spectacular versions of human
human endeavors absolutely see that's
one of reasons why Sports is a young
American religion sure because in sports
and whatever for I know that you got
Taekwondo and thing yeah yeah I mean and
you understand the role of excellence
with the grid Scott are tazed at that
place but to be able just to turn on our
television and see brother LeBron James
Dean thing that's another context that
cuts across race class gender and so
forth LeBron how you doing the memories
of Mike Jordan it was so important when
he sat out those three years in the late
1960s because he wouldn't go to Vietnam
courage man Muhammad Ali along with
Richard Pryor the Richards it was a
freest black black man the 20th century
but see that the boxing is so crucial as
well as the other the other sports
because for black people every other
sphere in the society is unfair and
unfree but when you get in that ring and
the referee is fair hmm you finally get
fair competition
yeah that's why Jack Johnson was such a
threat you remember Johnson walking
white brothers out there would be racial
riots against black folk killing black
folk all across the country don't you
get the idea and just because he beat
the white man in the context of fairness
yeah that you can beat anybody right and
that goes all the way to Muhammad Ali
it's very stirring you know the time I
spent with another genius named Prince
could we miss so so so very much
just nobody like it but he like Miles
Davis view Jack Johnson
that's his favorite black me mmm and
that interesting well he was a pioneer
because there was none before him Jack
Johnson was Jack generally the first by
him by himself in many way there was
born I think but not as famous not as
fairy but it turns in a spotlight yeah
there was other great boxers a black
time but he but he just took it yeah
lead the country and so forth yeah see
and what Muhammad Ali you know you got
someone who was just himself in the
context of a social movement that was
taking place at the same time so he
would associate himself with the black
freedom movement called a civil rights
movement he joined the Nation of Islam
under honorable eyes of Mohammed vain
became then we came very close to my
comics and had to deal with the split in
its own way and ultimately becomes you
know AM Orthodox Muslim but at the same
time recognizes his political
consciousness was tied to the Nation of
Islam and so forth
and for him to do that I mean to be
associated with the art of Elijah
Mohammed the Nation of Islam probably
had about 0.1 percent approval in the
country and probably about four or five
percent in the black community because
at that time black folk and black
Christians were just afraid you know the
black Muslims but it was Malcolm X who
in it all of his genius made it so
broadly conceived that even Christians
like myself I'm a Jesus loving free
black man but I can't live my life
without Malcolm mmm and he's Muslim to
the core right he's praying five times a
day you know what I mean that's just the
beginning of he's also very complicated
too because his grandfather was white
well he was white his father was a
Garvey I his mother was tied to the
iteration but fathers Garvey Ida was
killed his mother of course puttin us in
a sane asylum he's a foster child the
great stories he tells in the
autobiography of malcolm x one of the
great classics really memoirs in history
of american civilization was very
misunderstood in terms
the cultural narrative of who he was
absolutely no it's true he used to say
sincerity it's my only credential in the
powerful damn sincerity so when he said
white men and women are Devils and he
believed it he's wrong white brother
says not Devils then he says I changed
my mind they're not Devils they too many
got devilish behavior he's right because
that's due up too many of all of us out
Devils baby I see but when he said the
first thing he said what he meant he
meant what he said when he said the
second thing he said what he meant he
meant what you said you know how many
folk do we have like that
Friday that aren't scared to change
their mind and and speak what's deep
yeah so see one of the great gifts of
the artists and I speak about this
especially in the black tradition is
what we could call soulful canosa's ke
in OS is now canosa's means self giving
self donating and self-emptying so if
you go to a James Brown concert that
brother goes for fo and a half hours and
gives everything every fiber of his
being and at the end of every concert
what does he say I'm an extension of you
you're an extension of me can't exist
without you did we fail to play a song
that somebody came to hear an assister
holla you didn't play soft and you say
hit it Bootsy that's all because his
service you see our green
go to our green concert that brother
came walk hmm after the concert he's
given everything from falsetto to tenant
to everything ultimately that's what
happened with Prince right I mean Prince
had such incredible pain in his hips
hips jumping off piano that's on jump
off that's how he got hooked on pain
pills that's exactly and that's what
killed him ultimately John Coltrane
blowing his horn as if
his neck is gonna snap every night you
know and then he gave a concert November
1967 66 right before he died in July 67
he drops the horn start beating on his
chest shit at least say what's happening
train I'm just giving the people all
that I can in the now I'm horde getting
in the way oh you know what I mean but
don't you feel that when you walk off
the stage man when you walk on the stage
the strange times man you give it
everything all that Joe is at that
moment now what is that you see that is
the example of a Love Supreme
that is there to serve the people now
you gonna make a living - they don't get
paid you gonna get paid and so forth but
that's not the primary thing mmm that's
not it right even Curtis Mayfield sings
sayings his songs that the radio won't
play when he's told not to go to the
rallies and he shows up with his guitar
anyway in plays we a winner hmm that's
self-giving self-emptying and I tell it
to the young musicians these days cuz a
lot of it you know in the culture
spectacled nowadays you get these
performers they just show up and think
they ought to get a standing ovation for
ten minutes say no Negro sang a song
first man shit no spectacle because we
want you saying something that's gonna
stir our souls away say I'm cooking
Johnny Taylor and Lou Rawls when the
soul stirrers be it it's now we respect
that genius and so forth see Beyonce is
fascinating this regard because she's a
genius there's no doubt about it she's I
think she's the greatest entertainer of
our day I've been very critical of her
because there's a sense in which she's
still tied to the culture of superficial
spectacle hmm jump the way she looks and
girls in formation and so forth
but at the same time she's also grounded
in the tradition and there's a new movie
that she made you see they're no
homecoming no I haven't seen oh man you
got to see that's one of the greatest
performative films ever made man really
when she goes she goes to Coachella and
she shows up Coachella with all of the
bands of black colleges and performs all
of her songs with all of them moving
hundred fifty two hundred of them Wow
and didn't reflections and ninasam my
own and a brief of Franklin I don't know
beyond city I was wrong about Beyonce in
a certain sense now I'm telling you that
sister she brings a tradition with her
that is the highest level of both
respect and of excellence well maybe she
changed who she is because of criticism
like yours well just how you I've never
met her you know it reflects oh for sure
to say its ability is hard to say people
hear things like that it does make them
I think that that think that that could
be the case I mean she married to a
genius for sure with jay-z - and of
course the kids and then her lovely
parents and then family and think you
never know what goes on in the mind and
heart and soul what was a great artist
like Beyonce yeah what was it that led
you to be critical initially oh just
because I'm very concerned by young folk
you know I've made three three smoking
weird albums with print singing with
parentheses up he would not sample any
of allow any of his music be sampled by
hip-hop artists he was very hard on
hip-hop but when we asked him for spoken
word he said yes and thank God we did
same was true for the greatest soul sing
of his generation gerald levert really
there's so much more attention who's on
the album and so forth so I spent a lot
of time with young folk in studios just
did a thing with tempo one of the great
artists coming out of a Ferguson and
American Empire on black Julian to be
forty of coming out of lay oh I'm great
respect for I've been blessed to do a
number of things with with the young
folk but I tell them I say I'm hold
school yo you need to know that see we
into originals not in the copies you see
that we into lifting every voice that's
soulful so that we stir souls we don't
want to just too late bodies hmm we
don't want just stimulation of body
edges now I'm not a Puritan so you know
I believe in body stimulation at the
right time you know what I mean
ain't got nothing against orgasm but the
thing is you know you can't just
orgiastic we move to life right you got
to have context you got to have
tradition you got to stir souls in that
way and so I put a lot of pressure on
one of the things that I bring a lot of
take the bear is the I am deeply shaped
by the dramatics the Delfonics the main
ingredient the whispers lakeside James
Brown's band
George Clinton boots his band I'm shaped
by the emotions I'm shaped by the Jones
girls the miracles the temptations
Marvelettes all those were groups that
expressed their soulful self-emptying in
a form of sweetness see I believe in
sweetness and kindness and we're losing
that you I go to the young folk where is
your dramatics why is it we don't have
large numbers of groups that sing in
tune with a beauty and a sweetness and a
gentleness and a kindness when you hit a
voice of David Ruffin sing ain't too
proud to beg the vulnerability the
flexibility of it the intensity of it
and it goes straight to you so that's
why do people keep listening to yeah
David reference from why not Mississippi
I would say the same with Ted meals of
Blue Magic
I get the young folk just just stop
let's just listen to paired meals of the
Blue Magic let's just listen to Russell
Tompkins jr. at a stylistic oh brother
West you just old school you just
nostalgic no love sweetness gentleness
never goes down as my brother would put
it cliff never go out of style
everybody needs sweetness kindness
gentleness black music used to be the
fundamental conveyor of that sweetness
so that the Bing Crosby's the Frank
Sinatra's these are great great geniuses
themselves you ask Frank who were you
inspired by Billie Holiday are you
talking about the genius from Baltimore
City Billy that's right you Italian
working-class brother from Hoboken
that's right
cuz I'm tied to excellence and sweetness
mm-hmm now Frank said not to he's saying
some sweet gentle songs now yeah
but the younger generation these days
got him and some others who can who are
beautiful don't get me wrong but it's
smaller and smaller but it's partly a
matter of the oligarchs in the recording
industry mmm boys the men in the way is
the last great group singing a
performative act that connected to the
dramatics and Delfonics that I'm talking
about you say well what happens well
they think they could make more money
with just one Negro with a microphone
runnin a mouth so you get a genius like
Kanye deeply confused politically we
won't go into that
all this Trump connection we need some
serious pushing on that brother but
they'd rather have an individual
isolated easier to control in the
industry and the same Oleg arts run live
performance radio and the music and the
products you know how they've now
undergoing this fundamental
transformation an industry specially
given a new technology and social media
so that I tell the young folk I say you
know I could not have grown up without
the sweetness of those rhythm and blues
groups now I know the circumstances are
different but where do you get your
sweetness from musically what will be
the soundtrack of your freedom movement
genius is like Kendrick Lamar Ryan some
of the soundtrack there's no doubt about
that and then there's others as well but
not enough not enough soul stirring
music no there's no Curtis Mayfield
running near nobody do you think that's
that connected to the peacocking Lord
yes social media and the loot image
spectacles money Instagram push buttons
coming into the Bentley always got to be
in front of the commodity and so forth
and so on jewelry I mean you know
Pendergrass he had his sharp cars but
when that genius got into the studio in
the same love TK Oh mm-hmm
you don't give a damn what kind of car
he got right don't touch your soul you
know what I mean yeah and it's not just
on the black side we got we you know you
got vanilla blues men like Bruce
Springsteen and the Jewish brothers
genius up you can learn from Minnesota
Robert Zimmerman all of these folk were
involved in the canosa's activity of
self-emptying but they were deeply
shaped by the Sun houses the Robert
Johnson
yeah muddy water house the more rain is
the bestest Smith the blues tradition
do you know Gary Clark jr. Gary Clark
jr. he is one of those rare musicians
were you hear hear a riff and it's a
Gary Clark of when he played with my
friend Suzanne from honey honey yeah and
he they did Midnight Rider from The
Allman Brothers but he didn't as Gary
Clark jr. he's got a sound of his guitar
it reminds me of Hendrix in a way it's
very different than Hendrix but it
reminds me in that it's so distinctively
him well I got to hear this yeah thank
you so much he's a brilliant guy and a
great guy too but he's uh he's just a
unique unique artist like I don't know
anyone like him and his sound it's it's
one of those things where there's no
there's no mistaking who's playing the
music when you hear he's got his own oh
when he's playing the Nightrider which
is a classic of so many people as a song
yeah put this up give it put up this is
this is them up there there's Gary oh oh
yeah
gary on guitar this is me filming this
is that right yeah I was in the crowd
they did this midnight on a Tuesday in
the downtown LA how long ago was it year
ago or so just recently yeah this
motherfucker
oh he's one of my favorite artists fish
and hid that rabbit Jonathan ate him
already
he's got everything in them but it's
also buddy yeah but a guy once you hear
more Gary Clark you realize this is him
this is him I hear you
[Music]
you could feel it in the air in that
club there was maybe a hundred people in
that club Suzanne is reading the lyrics
from her phone she didn't even know the
lyrics they did this totally impromptu
is right on the spot totally on the spot
totally on the spot unprepared they
talked about his head let's do Midnight
Rider okay yeah so they they weren't
even they didn't rehearse this and her
sedated at all and it takes off on it
like just takes off on it just didn't of
it Austin Texas he's he's one of those
guys that you watch him and you just get
a tingle like he's like there's an
energy that comes out of him undeniable
greatness that's part of that selfie yes
yes but he's also a incredibly humble
guy no peacocking at all he's not he's a
that's a sign of spiritual maturity ends
moral security yes yes he's in secured
it makes you want to peek yes yes he's
just devoted to the work devoted to the
art how old brother is Gary he's
probably the start he's very young yeah
he's he's still getting better who's his
latest shit as his best shit he lives
here in LA it goes back and forth it
takes around here all the time
35 yeah I don't know I think he's out
here now right isn't he out here it was
just he Susanne just sent me a text
message they were just jamming at his
house last week so he must be out here
he's got some shows here in September
it's opening for the Rolling Stone oh
shit oh shit caught my teeth that's a
hell of a show right there
yeah he's there's a signed poster him
over by the kitchen he signed something
for me brother yeah gotta get something
I'll check I'll tell you which one to
get it's uh he's got some great great
work but there's there's those artists
that when you hear their thing whatever
it is it literally gives you energy if
you feel it in your body it's like a
drug it changes your state absolutely
no I mean wins but when you have the
very creative marriage of technique and
vision of craft and imagination mediated
through sound the vibration that I sent
are just beyond link but you know the
great John Coltrane had a whole
philosophy of vibrations son raw was
part of that dialogue as well Eric
Dolphy some of the rural geniuses at
that time you know and these vibrations
are just they're as real as a heart
attack but you can never see them yeah
Charles Baudelaire defined the
materialists as someone who was obsessed
with utensils and afraid of perfume
because perfume you can't touch it but
it's as real as our heart attack yeah
well the vibrations of deep music Mozart
to the miles or Mary Lou Williams Jerry
Allen or any of the great artists it
just goes through you yes and it's not
simply cerebro it doesn't bypass the
brain but it doesn't stay in the brain
it goes through your whole body
yeah it's like a drug changes your stage
Hank yeah if there was a drug that you
could take that made you feel the way
you feel when a great song comes on
you'd want to take that all the time dad
all the time yeah if it had no side
effects well in a way you can play that
song over yes you can I mean did
eventually get a little bit tolerant of
it unfortunately but what you were just
one of them but who would have made your
musicians that was shaping your
sensibility I was always in the rock and
roll was always in the classic rock when
I was young you know I was always into
God from everyone from Queen I was a big
Queen fan when I was a kid
definitely got into Boston yet no well I
left New Jersey when I was seven oh no
no this was boss I lived in San
Francisco from 7 to 11 that I lived in
Florida from
seven to 13 and then Boston from 13 to
24 she was mainly that Boston context we
had a classic rock yeah Oh Smith which
is a Boston bear of course you know a
lot of Van Halen yeah see I didn't get
into classic rock as much as I probably
should have it's only so much time yeah
there's only so much time to listen to
music that is an issue right there's so
much great work and every year new great
work gets created track of all love it
was mainly rhythm and blues when I
signed it down you know what I mean yeah
Sacramento California jazz came later
and then for me musical theater came and
in classical music I played classical
violin nearly 20 years oh wow and so uh
classical music was always important
must absorb a lot of time right here
what when I was first violin man I used
to conduct - oh man I decline of
Nachtmusik with Mozart we play egg
Martin but Beethoven and so forth and as
soon as it was over home and you know
Rockwood Otis red and man and and when
Isaac Hayes the black Moses and great
Barry White and others but it's
fascinating how you began to see these
connections the broader connections and
so classic rock was something that I got
to real late
when late as in you know 21 22 right and
in that sense very very much so
but a world without music oh it suck
well it's interesting to when you it's
all about the context of when the music
was created - because if you go and
listen to Robert Johnson today it's
still undeniably brilliant but what's
interesting is it was so good back then
the people thought he sold his soul to
the devil I mean that was the narrative
that's it that was the legend but if you
listen to it today in comparison to
something like Gary Clark it's so
simplistic it's the truth if Gary Clark
go back in time to when Robert Johnson
was alive they would think he was from
another planet but that's the truth they
wouldn't even understand it they
wouldn't even understand what he was
doing that's very
you know I used I was blessed to have
dialogue with BB King on a number of
occasions it was really the king in a
lot of ways King not because he was the
greatest blues artists but because he
was a great blues artist you know
through his personality and through his
generosity was able to create such a
presence that he becomes the king in
that way I had a chance to see him live
you saw him yes you started I was that
at the very end when he was sitting most
of the time no he was still staring
standards in late 90s
oh yeah no no you absolutely the power
out of his voice and me but he used to
say that the Blues was a kind of high
school visa Vee the Jazz who are those
who went to college
hmm and by college he meant just
studying with yeah but Armstrong would
do could ruffle foot in the really
Williams and the others and I always
tell myself I don't know about that
because you know the genius and
excellence comes in a number of
different forms most jazz musicians
don't have the genius of a Robert
Johnson and yet you know Charlie
Christians guitar is more complicated in
a variety of different ways in Robert
Johnson too so that you had to be able
to be flexible enough to see the
difference is the development building
on the genius of those who came before
so you can end up being a very good
guitar player who plays some
unbelievable chords that Jimi Hendrix
created yes but you build it on Jimmy
right and it becomes almost not taken
for granted but something you can use as
a launching pad like Stevie Ray Vaughan
did he rose vibration that's a great
examine added his own feel to it
absolutely absolutely and here again you
see you have the that common humanity
that cuts across color and there's a lot
of controversy these days about cultural
appropriation you know can white bows
and sisters really
be part of a black genre and so forth
and so on I had a dialogue at my class
at Harvard uh this spring I teach a
course on black intellectual tradition
and I include some white intellectuals
as part of it it was a strange career of
Jim Crow for example by the great C Vann
Woodward history of Jim Crow to the
Bible among Luther King said was the
Bible to summarize a movement Woodward
was a white southern brother and I have
to miss what we don't understand
completely brother West I said well let
me ask you this it's M&E and a part of
the hip-hop tradition at the highest
level yes he is yes he is that's what we
talk about hmm
you had to be a fool to deny the genius
of M&E yeah Eminem you see there's no a
man without dr. Dre and so forth so he
immerses and soaks himself in it but he
puts his own distinctive stamp on it
Halla Noakes would be another Righteous
Brothers another average white band
mm-hmm from Scotland well you know that
was way bigger and the funk that David
Jenner yeah oh my god now of course no
average white band without James Brown
James Brown I took it to places nobody
took right but right you let those guys
brothers play person-to-person on you
yeah Oh Lord pick up the pieces
oh why and it's slow my I mean it's just
soulful man you see Scotland Scotland
Robbie Burns mm-hmm David Hume colonized
by the British Empire responding in
their own creative ways and by the 20th
century they soaked in rhythm and blues
Wow Korea's like that today
really oh man you know Korean pop kpop
and catering boy no they've got a lot of
break dancers over there was not just
BTS nah BTS is something else they they
packed Madison Square zone but I'm
talking about like urban versus a cop
man oh they you put on coffee man oh
lord have mercy I played that too damn
Danny Glover another day on the Bernie
Sanders campaign we traveled way off in
the country and South Carolina for
brother Bernie I say Danny is Sam Cisco
I said listen these young Korean
brothers man
they gonna remind you the natural for
Richmond I put it on oh man here could
came to Korea what you talk about those
Koreans got a soulful sound man at I
blow your mind I've just reading a book
called the birth of Korean cool well
it's just a wall I don't know and it
shows again how you know that human
spirit has always grounded in something
local and particular like black music
but it travels it's it's it's the roots
and the routes yeah so the roots are
black but the RO Utes is global rights
just immersing themselves they immerse
dishing and the culture of like Japanese
jazz right you just got back from
Thailand yeah last year last year yeah
but now man it's it's it's a it's a
human thing it's the momentum of the
whole surfing the momentum of culture so
strange because it's a Thailand's a
great example that it's like they're so
different they're so thin the momentum
of culture like I just got back from
Italy they're so different but yet
they're so similar yeah but there's so
that there's there's a momentum of the
way they live their lives it's very
unique and unusual and I think that's
one of the great things about traveling
is you need to see oh well the way we
live here is that especially here in Los
Angeles which is preposterous I grew up
but I never lived it I live in Cambridge
yeah it's fine until four months of the
year when it's just a frozen wasteland
it's I used to perform a catcher izing
star oh yeah yeah in Harvard Square
absolutely right yeah it's Cambridge's
you mean it's a great place it's
wonderful it's like intellectually yeah
it's a wonderful thing and hang out
there's a lot of gates and yes Brendan
Terry and well Bob they'll be Boston's a
strange place it really is
so many different flavors to it you know
but it's um so goddamn cold but it gets
cold but that's what it's time to go in
the library read some books yeah it also
builds character
but that's true too there's something
about people that grow up in cold
climates to come to terms yeah Chicago
yeah Chicago's a perfect example there's
great people there because they have
character absolute Detroit they deal
with that shit got it I deal with in
terms yeah right about that told me I
mean one of the sadder features of our
our moment given a whole are the joy of
reveling in each other's humanity and
music and so forth is that you know you
got impending ecological catastrophe
mmm-hmm escalating nuclear catastrophe
economic catastrophe the grotesque
wealth inequality all around the world
spiritual catastrophe in terms of
intensifying forms of depression suicide
wasted lies lack of self-respect not
believing in oneself and thinking that
the only way you can really make it is
by imitating the mainstream forms of
conformity hmm and in the political
catastrophes of right-wing movements all
around the world yeah and by right-wing
movements what I mean is the rule of big
money big military and then scapegoat
the most vulnerable and try to convince
the most vulnerable that it's their
fault that they're in the subordinate
positions that they are rather than
giving them a fair chance you see and
that's the makings of new forms of
fascism and so on you see and you say to
yourself you know how do we hold on to
some sense of hope and there is no hope
without wrestling with despair if you
afraid of despair you never have hope
what do you when you say lefse with it
you've got to wrestle with it not allow
it to have the last word but you gotta
wrestle with it when you're talking
about the your concern about nuclear
catastrophe impending nuclear
catastrophe
you're talking about what's going on
right now with Iran well I'm thinking
about Russia Russia the Sun is us
missile has that right
north possibility of war u.s. bombing
precious Iran Iranian brothers and
sisters are as precious and priceless as
anybody actually just happened to be
under an authoritarian rule that that
does need to be changed and transformed
there's no doubt about it but you think
you know all the hell they've been
through man eight years when the United
States was on the side of Saddam Hussein
yeah and they were all alone in the
world it's very much like our Jewish
brothers sisters felt in 1973 they're
already undergone a genocidal attack one
out three president Jews killed and 73
do their in the world all by themselves
other than the US Empire you say oh my
god who can I rely on and that brings
out the worst in people the worst in
people because it's all about in-crowd
in-group security yes authoritarian on
the inside and distrustful of the whole
world on the outside and this is why
it's so difficult to have a discussion
about Israeli occupation what our
precious Palestinian brothers and
sisters because to try to be able to
cast a light on how an underdog cause
that's the history Jews 2,000 years it's
basically underdog became an oppressor
and how they become top dogs tied to the
u.s. top dogs right now you always have
the ginn those Jewish voices and
organization that are critical of
Israeli occupation critical of any
actions of human beings including Jews
that are that need to be calling the
question but it's hard to keep track of
the rich and priceless humanity of
Palestinian brothers and sisters under
occupation second-class citizenship when
it's very clear that Jews have been so
viciously treated for 2,000 years in the
history of history of the West as well
as the history of the the Middle East
and yet we have a moral duty to keep
track of the preciousness of pressed
Palestinian babies just as we ought to
keep track of the preciousness of Jewish
babies when Gaza and Tel Aviv must have
a a spot
light in terms of what those human
beings are going through on both sides
of that divide as it were even given a
symmetric relation of power and that
structure of domination called the
occupation might say the same thing
about Tibet
I'd say same thing about cash yeah I'd
say same thing about Western sub-sahara
under Moroccan domination there's so
many examples that we human beings
generate that require our moral and
spiritual witness and our analytical
attention and our artists who can
authorize an alternative even if only
for a moment an alternative what is the
art like in Palestine the art the art
the art in Houston Oh unbelievable
I mean I would imagine when you're
dealing with such an oppressed group of
people they're living in the Arias
situation and time in history is
unbeliev I was just talked to my dear
brother Mark Lamont Hill we just had him
in Harvard for dialogue another
Palestinian in black situation and he
goes back and forth and he talks about
the Palestinian hip-hop artists really
oh my god they got one of the richest
subcultures of hip-hop this is not
always the case when you have a culture
that's down trial absolutely and you get
the Kurds in Turkey to apply the
disproportionate amount of influence on
Turkish culture what's like a good
Palestinian hip hop band to look into
that's a good question because I you
know I didn't really follow through I
like to listen to that to me I don't
know what they're saying I love
listening to music where I don't know
the language you could just feel the
spirit go into vibrations Brazilian
nation I love Brazilian hip-hop because
I don't speak Portuguese and it's just
amazing the sound as I've never heard
Raziel they'll come out to their
soundtrack is Brazilian artists yeah
yeah no it's I mean it to me you know
one of the uplifting features of being
rooted in the arts and music
is that no matter how ugly and vicious
and hateful things are it never
suffocates the human spirit hmm somebody
gonna tell a joke laughs something
they're lying a song you touch your soul
ya know what I mean yeah
and it's almost a way of saying I love
you not in a sentimental Hollywood
stereotypical way but you know that song
by Stevie Wonder these three words
mm-hmm
you got that me we can't play we can't
play daddy will get no right because
that was a video that you put up there
before yeah but that video was Mary
Johnson singing in a concert I
definitely know that you did yeah listen
to Stevie man because he's Tombaugh how
an aching heart can be kindled to smile
mmm open act in a world overwhelmed by
hatred and distrust that shut it shut do
all of us and we all contribute to it
and we all contribute to it you see I
mean that's one of the reasons why even
when I talk about you know brother Trump
as a the gangster I kind of do you have
created a fascist Frankenstein and he's
the creation of the worst of America and
the way in which Martin King represents
the best and they are both America's
apple pie but any critique of anybody
ought to begin with yourself hmm
who we are because we all got gangster
elements inside of us no way around us
what else from him no I've never I met
him one time I think at the end of Anita
Baker concert in the casinos in the
Atlantic City way back in the 80s and it
was interesting he was there with Mike
Tyson I think and it was interesting
because it was a chocolate affair you
know to me you know the vanilla brother
there right and you know one of the
first things that come across to the
brother is that it just so glad to be
there hanging out with the black
brothers cool it's so funny you could
just tell he just squares
and rectangle you see you gonna listen
to your Beach Boys man we got James
Brown brother we got we Brian Wilson we
love you but we got JB man and but it's
but and it's a cultural dynamic because
he was the richest one in the room right
and Mike Tyson got a lot of money when
Don King got that money too but but it
was a different kind of dynamic and so
it's a context in which you embrace you
know it we embrace them because that's
the best of black culture we embrace
every body Donald Trump's mother shows
up from Scotland in 1930 black people
been here nine generation we're gonna
say go back where you come from come on
in here sister Bea Marta this democratic
experiment we on the other side of
chocolate side of town but we welcome
you but don't say nothing about our
brown brothers and sisters coming in
from Mexico we lean because if anybody
is definitive about what is America it's
gonna be red and black people because
they're the ones who undergo the
monstrous crimes against humanity to
genocide a stolen land on the one hand
and the stolen peoples and the Human
Bondage on the other those are the
pillars the worst pillars of the country
then you've got democratic visions
coming not just from Thomas Jefferson
but they're coming from the slaves like
Frederick Douglass mmm the border crisis
is a very interesting one right because
it's it represents the the fear of
people from the downtrodden countries
where they don't have opportunity trying
to get into this country yes but then it
also represents the fear of criminals of
drug dealers and gangsters and gang
members make cartel members making the
way across and victimizing our citizens
at both days a humo things are real
human but if you tell the lies and make
it as if the latter represents my whole
right and that's what Trump specializes
see did you see the video of pence when
he was down there at the detention
centers and just just looking away no
humanity just very disturbing and it's
so you know it's so sad because he
a brother who stakes his whole personal
identity on Christian being a Christian
yes like my coming as a Christian I'm
not trying to call into question your
Christian faith for nothing I don't have
authority to do that but the Bible says
in part by thy works you shall know them
the works of love they exemplify and you
know nowadays you got commodified
Christianity and a commodified culture
of a declining Empire and you get
Christian evangelicals 91 percent of
self pro-trump 79 percent sees that he's
doing the best possible job and you say
to yourself Wow Christianity it seems to
have lost meaning of the Cross and has
become so accommodated to the Empire and
it was the Roman Empire who put Jesus to
death it was a Roman Empire you had some
neo-colonial elites who cooperated but
it was a Roman Empire who put Jesus to
death it was the greatest empire of its
day very much like the Persian Empire
the largest greatest empire of its day
with Cyrus degree now you got the Roman
Empire putting Jesus to death and here
Jesus is sent there by the crowd by the
mob and you say to breath of Michael
pence so you're gonna accommodate
yourself to Donald Trump
you're gonna accommodate yourself to
policies that are so inhumane and
barbaric just to retain your position
and try to then rationalize it as a
Christian we need some music and some
comedy to try to get in contact with his
humanity to change him but most
importantly you just need a social
movement you know you need to get him
out of office accountability but with
parents that just there's seeing him in
reaction to those people it's just a
failure just cold desert
they're halas well the narrative is that
they broke the law and that they're
imposing upon our great nation and you
know this is its crimes of opportunity
they're just trying to trying to find
opportunity they trying to they're
coming over here because they want a
better life to not have sympathy for
that and in other than indigenous
peoples and in my own African peoples
that is the history to come yes open and
bring into the country those who are
eager and have energy willing to work
and sacrifice and a unbelievable
contribution voluntary immigrants to the
making of American American that a
nation of immigrants I don't like that
language because it overlooks indigenous
peoples and involuntary implements like
black people and and and slavery was not
America's original sin that's another
neoliberal line that you hear all the
time on the corporate media as if
indigenous peoples suffering has to be
rendered invisible highlight black
people what's one of the least discussed
in justices of this nation and then is
their current situation with their in
these reservations with extreme
alcoholism so they still got the rich
music and poetry and resistant but the
the social conditions are just but this
the they are the casualties of a settler
colonial enterprise and we rather act as
if they don't exist I mean we black
people became central because our labor
and our imagination and culture became
central and we had a mulberry Civil War
750,000 people day in each life precious
and that has been the central event in
the shaping of America so when people
talk about race it goes straight to
blackness as if indigenous peoples and
retinas not integral to it's just that
they've been British so invisible and
the vicious attack has been so immense
what's so complicated too that they have
their own rules on the reservations
they're allowed to have gambling and
they can have all sorts of they they
have their own sovereignty in a certain
way on the reservations is very
oh no it's true and I was blessed to be
there in Standing Rock on a couple of
December's ago it was one of the
marvelous moments in in my life to stand
there with the the group there was a
multiracial group people came from all
around the world and I am a client from
Canada for the most part it was a matter
of the indigenous peoples coming
together memories of Wounded Knee 1890
400 people did you remind people with us
with Stanley Rock is my standing right
was a struggle over that pipeline
absolutely trying to put pressure on the
Obama administration to ensure that a
pipeline was not built that would
violate the sacred lands and many of the
sacred memories of indigenous peoples
and it was magnificent because you had
two coming together of indigenous
nations because part of the problem this
is true for all oppressed people is
fighting among themselves and the
difficulty of coming together the first
time you had to coming together a
significant number of indigenous peoples
nations unified against the greedy
corporate elites who were trying to
promote this pipeline through Canada all
the way down to the southern section of
the United States and it was his stuff
well we first we got an announcement
right where we were there was freezing
to me it was December and they were
hosing people down - oh Lord
they were hosing people down wedding
wedding them down while this is all
going on and it was about minus 15 or
whatever it was it was freezing up there
you know and but know what we got an
announcement from the Obama
administration for a suspension of it
because they had plan to do it - I mean
you know Obama administration can be
very accommodating to Wall Street
interests and corporate elite interests
and so forth even given the image and
spectacle of a black president being a
progressive and what-have-you much more
progressive to Trump that's not saying
too much right but but we got a
suspension and and the struggle
continues really but it was it and it
has sent tremendous ripples through the
cultures of indigenous peoples and their
nations in terms
coming together and the fact that it was
successful absolutely and there was at
least a relative victory yeah all these
victories a relative but very relative
victory it was beautiful just to see
again you you know you can't downplay
the role of joy don't brother this is so
very important to joy in struggle the
joy in organising the joy in fighting
for justice
the joy in the nightclubs the joy and
the churches and mosques temples of
synagogues joy is something that we need
to come back to that's one of the great
secrets of the human conditions what are
the sources of joy what are the
conditions for the possibility of joy
we've been obsessed with pleasure for
the last a hundred years or so and
there's nothing wrong with with pleasure
but pleasure is not the same thing as
joy you know when you look at the
sparkling eyes of your precious daughter
that's not pleasure that's joy hmm
you and your wife that's deep deep joy
that's what endures you could be broke
as the Ten Commandments financially but
that memory will bring you joy
that's real joy not peacocking that's
exactly right
that's exactly right you said so many
amazing things today
this was one of my favorite podcasts of
all time I just want to thank you for
being here is the time up all right time
it's already 11 o'clock no god mighty
this has been a blessing brother my
pleasure
what a human being you are my brother
you stay strong though me too sir thank
you very much it really a lovely man
[Applause]
[Music]